Interactive proof
=================

Holes
-----

The basic ingredient of interactive proof is a *hole*.  A hole is indicated by the character ``?``, which is always its own token.  A hole does not synthesize, but checks against any type whatsoever.  A command containing one or more holes will succeed as long as all the terms in it typecheck without knowing anything about the contents of the holes, i.e. treating the holes as axioms generalized over their contexts, i.e. if it would be well-typed for *any* value of the hole having its given type.  If there are equality constraints on the possible fillers of the hole, then the command will fail; a hole is not equal to anything except itself (this may be improved in the future).

When a command containing holes finishes succesfully (in verbose or interactive mode), messages are emitted showing the type and context of every hole in it.  In ProofGeneral mode, these types and contexts are displayed in the "goals" window.  You can then continue to issue/process other commands afterwards, and each hole will continue to be treated like an axiom.  When a term containing a hole is printed, the hole displays as ``?N{…}`` where ``N`` is the sequential number of the hole.  (Note that even if no holes appear explicitly when you print a term, it might still depend implicitly on the values of holes if it involves constants whose definition contain holes.)  Unlike the printing of most terms, ``?N{…}`` for a hole is *not* a re-parseable notation.  Moreover, if the hole has a nonempty context, then occurrences of that hole in other terms may have other terms substituted for the variables in its context and these substitutions *are not indicated* by the notation ``?N{…}`` (this is what the notation ``{…}`` is intended to suggest).  This may be improved in future, but it is ameliorated somewhat by the treatment of holes in case trees.

Specifically, a hole ``?`` left in a place where a case tree would be valid to continue is a *case tree hole*, and is treated a bit differently than an ordinary hole.  The obvious difference is that a case tree hole can be solved (see :ref:`Solving holes`) by a case tree rather than an ordinary term.  But in addition, evaluation of a function does not reduce when it reaches a case tree hole, and thus a case tree hole will never appear when printing terms: instead the function in which it appears as part of the definition.  This may be a little surprising, but it has the advantage of being a re-parseable notation, and also explicitly indicating all the arguments of the function (which would constitute the substitution applied to a term hole, and hence not currently printed).

When Narya reaches the end of a file (or command-line ``-e`` string) in which any holes were created and not solved, it issues an error.  In the future this might become configurable, but it aligns with the behavior of most other proof assistants that each file must be complete before it can be loaded into another file.  Of course, this doesn't happen in interactive mode.  For this reason, a warning message is emitted after every command as long as there are open holes remaining.


Solving holes
-------------

Generally the purpose of leaving a hole is to see its displayed type and context, making it easier to *fill* the hole by a term.  The most straightforward way to fill a hole is to edit the source code to replace the ``?`` by a term (perhaps containing other holes) and reload the file.  In interactive mode, if you just entered a command containing a hole, you can ``undo 1`` to cancel the original command containing the hole, press Up-arrow or Meta+P to recover it in the history, edit it to replace the ``?``, and re-execute it.  And in ProofGeneral mode, you can use ``C-c C-u`` or ``C-c RET`` to retract the hole-creating command (along with any commands after it) and edit it (or just start editing it and it will auto-retract), and then re-process it with ``C-c C-n``.

It is also possible to fill a hole *without* retracting the command or any other commands after it.  In ProofGeneral mode, if you position the cursor over a hole (perhaps using ``C-c C-j`` and ``C-c C-k`` to move between holes) and type ``C-c C-SPC``, ProofGeneral will prompt you for a term with which to solve the hole.  If this term does successfully solve the hole, it will be inserted to replace the ``?`` in the buffer, without retracting the original command or anything after it.  This enables you to process a bunch of commands containing holes, some of which might be slow to run, and then progressively work on filling the holes in any desired order without having to retract and re-process anything.  Of course, the term that you fill a hole with contain other holes.

The term solving a hole is parsed and typechecked *in the context where the hole was created*.  Thus it can refer by name to variables that were in the context at that point (like ``X`` above) and constants that were defined at that point, and use notations that were in effect at that point, but not constants or notations that were defined later.

You can also solve a hole directly in interactive mode with the command ``solve``, identifying a particular hole by its number as in ``solve 0 ≔ X``.  (This is also the command issued by ProofGeneral under the hood when you use ``C-c C-SPC``.)  But identifying a hole by number is too brittle to use in a file, so this command is only allowed in interactive mode.

If you have forgotten the context and type of a hole that were displayed when it was created, you can re-display them in interactive mode with the command ``show hole HOLE`` which displays the context and type of a specific open hole by number, or ``show holes`` which displays the context and type of all the currently open holes.  In ProofGeneral mode the key command ``C-c C-?`` issues ``show holes``, while ``C-c C-,`` issues ``show hole`` with the hole number inferred automatically from the cursor position (which must be over an open hole).  You can move between the existing holes with ``C-c C-j`` (next hole) and ``C-c C-k`` (previous hole).
 
Finally, if the cursor is over a hole, then the commands ``C-c ;`` (normalize a term) and ``C-c :`` (display the type of a term) operate in the context of that hole.  Moreover, these commands, as well as ``C-c C-SPC`` which solves a hole, share an input history: when prompted by any of them for a term, you can press the up and down arrows, or ``M-p`` and ``M-n``, to cycle through the terms you have previously input.  Thus, you can try out possible hole fillers or subterms thereof with ``C-c :``, comparing their types to the goal type of the hole until you are ready to fill the hole, and then easily supply the same term to ``C-c C-SPC``.

Splitting in holes
------------------

Narya has a limited ability to infer the shape of a term to solve a hole with from the type of that hole.  In ProofGeneral mode, if you position the cursor over a hole and type ``C-c C-y``, Narya will try to guess the shape of a term to fill the hole with, leaving additional holes in appropriate places.  This includes:

- If the hole has a function type, the term inserted will be an abstraction with a new hole in the body.  The variable names in the abstraction are taken from the function type, e.g. for ``(x : A) → B`` the term inserted will be ``x ↦ ?``.  For a function type with unnamed variable like ``A → B``, the variable inserted will be a placeholder ``_``.  Iterated function-types like ``(x : A) (y : B) → C`` lead to iterated abstractions ``x y ↦ ?``, and higher-dimensional function-types like ``Id ((x : A) → B) f g`` lead to cube abstractions ``x ⤇ ?`` (see :ref:`Parametric Observational Type Theory`).

- If the hole has a record type (see :ref:`Record types and tuples`), the term inserted will be a tuple with all fields labeled such as ``(fst ≔ ?, snd ≔ ?)``.  This includes higher-dimensional versions of record types (see :ref:`Parametric Observational Type Theory`).

- If the hole has a codata type (see :ref:`Codatatypes and comatching`), including higher-dimensional versions thereof, the term inserted will be a comatch such as ``[ .head ↦ ? | .tail ↦ ? ]``.  This also works with :ref:`higher coinductive types`: the correct number of copies of each higher field are inserted depending on the dimension of the type.

You can also split on a hole directly in interactive mode, identifying a hole by its number as in ``split 0 ≔ _``.  (The placeholder ``_`` is necessary, as in the future we may also implement splitting on a supplied term that belongs to some datatype.)  This can be a bit confusing, though, because it doesn't inform you about the term that was inserted, only about all the new holes.


Undoing solved holes
--------------------

Solving a hole cannot be "undone" by Narya; it happens "outside the timestream", effectively altering a previously executed command rather than executing a new one, and does not affect the sequence of commands available to be undone.  This should be intuitive in ProofGeneral, where solving a hole does not change the processed region or insert any commands in the buffer, and a subsequent "undo" (``C-c C-u``) acts on the most recently processed command *in the buffer* whether or not that was the command containing the solved hole.  For example, suppose you process a command defining ``f`` that contains a hole, then process another command defining ``g``, then solve the hole in the definition of ``f``.  After this, an "undo" will retract the definition of ``g``, leaving the definition of ``f`` with its solved hole in place.
 
Along the same lines, undoing commands in ProofGeneral does not affect the replacement of holes by the terms that solve them in the text of the buffer.  Thus, if you process a command containing a hole, solve the hole, and then undo *that* command, the term with which you solved the hole remains in the buffer in place of the original ``?``.  Therefore, if you then re-process the command, the solving term will be used where there used to be a hole, without creating a hole at all.  For purposes of later commands, this *should* be entirely equivalent to continuing on with a filled hole, but it is not *literally* identical in Narya's internals, so bugs may exist; if you find one, please report it.

On the other hand, solving a hole changes the text of the Emacs buffer, and therefore it *can* be un-done with *Emacs's* ``undo`` command (generally bound to ``C-/``, ``C-_``, and ``C-x u``), removing the inserted term and replacing the original ``?``.  Since the "solve" command cannot be undone by Narya, if you undo it in Emacs there is no consistent thing that Narya can do with the command containing that hole.  Thus, in this case the Narya ProofGeneral mode automatically also retracts the processed region past the command containing the hole.

Reformatting solved holes
-------------------------

By default, when filling a hole interactively with ProofGeneral, the term you enter is automatically reformatted.  In particular, line breaks and indenting spaces are inserted in (what Narya thinks are) appropriate places (and removed from what it thinks are inappropriate places), and ASCII operators such as ``->`` and ``|->`` are replaced by their Unicode equivalents such as → and ↦.  Unfortunately, at present the solving term is reformatted entirely on its own without reference to the command in which it appears, so after it is inserted the overall command may still be badly formatted, especially if you inserted a case tree structure such as ``match``.  Currently the only solution to this is to retract the command after solving the hole and then re-process it to reformat it.

As with reformatting of commands and source files, reformatting of hole-solving terms is affected by the command-line flags ``-unicode`` and ``-ascii`` (print operators as → or ``->``, respectively).  You can also turn off solve-reformatting entirely by setting the Emacs customization variable ``narya-reformat-holes`` to ``nil``.  However, if you don't like the way Narya reformats your terms, I would appreciate it if you give me feedback about it rather than (or, at least, in addition to) turning it off.
